  
 
 
 
Architectural Guidelines, Standards & Criteria 
 
 
 
For The 
 
 
 
SOLTERRA RESORT HOMEOWNERS 
ASSOCIATION 
(AS MAY BE AMENDED BY THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS) 
 
 
August 18, 2020
1  
TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
I. Introduction 1 
II. Architectural Modification Request      2 
A. General        2 
B. Supporting Documents and Materials     2 
III. The Review Process        3 
A. Initial Review       3 
B. Submission of Plans to the Building Department    3 
C. Construction Commencement      4 
D. Final Inspection       4 
IV. Express Approval       4 
V. Reconstruction        5 
VI. Administrative Fees and Compensation      5 
VII. Appeals Process        5 
VIII. Site Improvement Standards       6 
A. Additions/Setbacks        6 
B. Air Conditioners       6 
C. Antennae & Satellites      6 
D. Barbecues/Smokers/Grills/Fire Pits      6 
E. Canopies        7 
F. Clotheslines        7 
G. Patios        7 
H. Dog Houses/Kennels/Dog Runs/Invisible Fences    7 
I. Drainage Swales       7 
J. Driveway and Sidewalk Extensions     8 
K. Elevation of Lots       8 
L. Encroachment and Plantings on Common Ground    8 
M. Exterior Painting       8 
N. Fences, Hedges and Walls       8 
O. Firewood        9 
P. Flags        9 
Q. Front Entryway/Storm Doors      10 
R. Front Roof Changes       10 
S. Garage        10 
T. Garbage/Screening of Containers/HVAC & Other Equipment  10 
U. Garden Hoses       11 
V. Gas Tanks (Propane  and/or Natural)    11 
W. Gutter        11 
X. Holiday Decorations       11 
Y. House Numbers       11 
Z. Lake Slope Maintenance and Erosion Standards    12 
AA. Landscaping/Borders/Arbors/Trellis/Water Features   12 
BB. Lawn Furnishings/Decorative Accessories/Statutes/Feeders   14 
CC. Lighting        15 
DD. Lightning Rods and Brushes      15 
EE. Mailbox        15 
FF. Outbuildings       15 
GG. Patios and Screen Enclosures       15 
HH. Play Equipment and Accessory Structures     16 
II. Signs        17 
JJ. Skylights and Solar Collectors      17 
KK. Storm/Hurricane Shutters       18 
LL. Swimming Pools/Spas/Jacuzzis      18 
MM. Water Softeners       19 
NN. Windows, Awnings and Shutters      19 
 
2  
 
OO. Landscape        19 
1. Landscaping of Easements      19 
2. Approved Landscape Palette      19 
3. Prohibited Landscape Materials      20 
4. Landscape Zones      20 
a. Streetscape Zone      20 
b. Front Yard Zone      20 
c. Side Yard Zone      20 
d. Rear Yard Zone      21 
5. General Landscape Requirements     21 
a. Design Approach      21 
b. Landscape Quality and Installation     21 
c. Street and Yard Staking      21 
d. Existing Trees      21 
e. Tree Fences, Wells and Aerators     21 
f. Mulch       21 
g. Landscape Rocks      22 
h. Sod        22 
i. Utility Easement      22 
j. Service Yard Access      22 
k. Sight Distances at Intersections     22 
l. Artificial Vegetation and Decorative Embellishments  22 
m. Wells       22 
n. Irrigation Systems       22 
6. Lot Maintenance      23 
a. Maintenance of Lots       23 
b. Maintenance of Roofs and Driveways    23 
c. Maintenance of Right-of-Ways    23 
d. Shoreline Area      23 
1  
Architectural Guidelines, Standards & Criteria 
 
I. INTRODUCTION 
 
The intent of the contents of this guide, as well as the existence of the Design Review polic y, is to provide the 
guidelines required for maintaining an aesthetically pleasing community. Adhering to these guidelines is beneficial 
for all involved in that they are meant to protect the investment of the homeowners, as well as portray a quality 
community of well -planned homes constructed with long lasting materials maintaining high construction 
standards. 
 
The Architectural Guidelines have been adopted by the Board of Directors of Solterra Resort Homeowners  
Association pursuant to Article s VII and VIII  of the Declaration of Covenants, Conditions and Restrictions 
(Declaration). The Board of Directors and/or its sanctioned committees will enforce these Architectural Guidelines.  
The Board of Directors may amend and/or modify these Guidelines from time to time by simple majority vote of 
the Board. 
 
In conjunction with the recorded Documents for Solterra Resort Homeowners Association Inc. (”SRHA”), the 
design standards are binding on all parties ha ving interest in any portion of Solterra and each ho meowner is 
required to comply with the requirements as set forth. Any failure to comply with these requirements will be 
subject to remedies provided for in the recorded documents. 
 
These Guidelines are designed to provide an overall framework that will all ow the community to develop and 
progress in an orderly, cohesive and attractive manner. They include minimum standards for the design, size, 
location, style, structure, materials, color, and mode of architecture, mode of landscaping and relevant criteria 
for the construction or addition of improvements of any nature. They also establish a process for judicious review 
of proposed changes within the community. 
 
SRHA was developed with the intent that homes harmonize with each other and present a pleasing and consistent 
style. Except as required by the Declaration, this style is not the result of a formal architectural code but rather 
the result of the vision of the community Association. In the event that an owner wishes to modify their property 
and these guid elines do not address the type of modification that the owner wishes to install,  the Board of 
Directors hereby recognizes and adopts the style and form of the existing, as -built (and properly approved as 
otherwise required by the Declaration) as the standard. This standard shall continue in effect until the adoption 
and publication of new guidelines and standards thus ensuring the preservation of the existing harmonious design 
and preventing the introduction of design that is not in keeping with the community. This does not eliminate the 
need to submit an Architectural Modification Request Form and receive approval prior to starting any  proposed 
modification. 
 
The architectural review process has been established to maintain the integrity of the architectural and design 
character of SRHA. To this end, the Board of Directors or their appointed representative will review all proposed 
additions, improvements or alterations on homes for conformity with the Architectural Guidelines. The reviewing 
entity may be the Declarant, its designee or the Architectural Review Board and will commonly be referred to as 
the “Reviewer”. 
 
Terms such as “good taste” and “sound design” are difficult to define and even more difficult to legislate. It is the 
intent of these guidelines to encourage “good design” by showing examples of the desired result. Elements such 
as deed restrictions, appropriate attention to scale, proportion to the community should be considered with all 
requests. 
2  
To the extent that any government ordinance, building code or regulation requires a more restrictive standard 
than that found in these guidelines, the government standards shall prevail. To the extent that any government 
ordinance, building code or regulation is less restrictive than these guidelines and any standards contained herein, 
or the Declaration, these Architectural Guidelines and the Declaration shall prevail. Nothing containe d in these 
guidelines shall obligate any agency, governmental or otherwise, to approve plans submitted, nor shall the 
approval of the Reviewer be construed as meeting either the requirements of Polk County or any governmental 
agency required for approval. 
 
The Declaration contains a disclaimer by the developer, the Association and the Reviewer of liability or 
responsibility for the approval of plans and the specifications contained in any request by an owner. Prior to 
submitting plans or information for rev iew, you should read and understand this disclaimer. It is also 
recommended that you review your builder warranties prior to submitting any request for alterations to your 
property since certain additions, alterations and renovations to a home or lot may void any existing warranties. 
 
The Reviewer has the right to modify, revise, add, delete or make any changes to this manual by a majority vote 
of the Board of Directors. 
 
II. ARCHITECTURAL MODIFICATION REQUEST 
 
A. General 
A homeowner wishing to make an exterior change or modification to their home and/or lot shall apply for and 
receive written approval for such change or modification prior to beginning the project. The application is made 
by completing the Architectural Modification Request Form. One form should be submitted for each alteration that 
is being planned. Multiple projects should not be included on the same form. The completed form, together with 
all applicable information should be submitted to the SRHA management company. All improvements on a lot 
shall not encroach on the neighboring property or district property. ALL requests require the submission of a copy 
(not an original) of the owner’s lot survey showing the signature and seal of the surveyor and the location of the 
proposed modification marked on the survey. An Architectural Modification Request Form is not considered 
complete until it is accompanied by all of the information necessary for the Reviewer to make an informed 
decision. Incomplete applications  will be “Rejected” and shall not be considered until resubmitted with the 
necessary information. 
 
B. Supporting Documents and Materials 
An Architectural Modification Request will not be considered accepted until it is accompanied by the required 
plans, and/or specifications showing the nature, kind, shape, height, materials and color to be used and the 
location of the proposed alteration. As stated above, ALL requests require the submission of a copy of the owner’s 
lot survey showing the signature and se al of the surveyor and the location of the modification marked on the 
survey. 
 
Requests for room additions, extensions, modifications including swimming pools and their screened enclosures, 
and fences require a copy of the lot survey clearly depicting the location, size and measurements of the proposed 
change and the measurements to the lot boundary line; contractor drawings; list of materials to be used; and 
sample of roof shingles and/or paint if applicable. Requests for exterior dwelling surfaces includi ng painting, 
installation of pavers or tiles require a lot survey with a sketch of the area(s) to be covered and a sample of the 
proposed material such as paver, tile or paint chip. 
 
A request for landscaping requires a copy of the lot survey depicting the location where plants are to be installed, 
a sketch of the proposed landscape areas and a list of plants to be installed. Please indicate measurements from 
the property lines when installing trees, landscape beds, etc. Requests to remove trees shall inclu de a diagram 
depicting the approximate location of all existing trees and their types, along with the trees to be removed and 
the reason for their removal. 
3  
III. THE REVIEW PROCESS 
 
The design and construction review process is  a 4 -step procedure: Initial Review, Submission of Plans, 
Construction Commencement and Inspection. Thorough and timely submission of information, as well as, 
adherence to the guidelines set forth in the process will prevent delays and minimize frustration  of all parties 
involved. Questions concerning interpretation of any matter set forth in the guidelines should be directed to the 
Reviewer or Management Company. 
 
A. Initial Review 
 
It is required that a homeowner submit to the Reviewer an Architectural Modification Request Form for the 
modification that is being requested, along with a set of plans. Any and all modification requests and submission 
of supporting documentation should be made by regular mail or in person to the management company. Facsimile 
or electronic submission with verification of transmittal will not be acceptable. The information required for the 
review is as follows: 
 
1. Architectural Modification Request Form with a detailed description of the planned modification 
2. Site Plans showing the approximate location and dimensions of all improvements, including driveway, irrigation, 
and swimming pools 
3. Lot survey 
4. Floor Plans if applicable 
5. Exterior elevations (all sides) if applicable 
6. Concept Landscape Plan if modification involves changes to the current landscape 
7. Any other information, data, and drawings as may be reasonably requested by the Reviewer 
 
No construction or structural improvement, no alteration or addition to any existing structure or site improvement 
shall be made on any property unt il the plans and specifications showing the proposed design, nature, type, 
shape, size, color, materials and location of same shall have been submitted to and shall have received final 
approval by the Reviewer. In the case of an incomplete application or t he request by the Reviewer for more 
information, the applicant will have fifteen (15) days to comply with the request. Failure to comply within the 15 
days will result in the need for a new application to be submitted. 
 
The Reviewer shall review the information and indicate its approval, disapproval, or recommendations for change 
to the plan. The Reviewer will review the accompanying documents within thirty (30) days and send notice of 
Reviewer’s decision with appropriate response shown below: 
 
1. Approved – the entire project submitted is approved in total subject to installation per the existing Architectural 
Guidelines. 
2. Approved with Stipulations – the project submitted is partially approved. The owner may proceed with the work 
to be performed as modified by  the Reviewer. Owner must comply with any and all notations made by the 
Reviewer regarding the project and the existing Architectural Guidelines. 
3. Disapproved – the entire project submitted is denied and no work may commence. In some cases, the project 
may be denied because additional information is required in order to make an informed decision. 
 
Any Modification Request not approved or disapproved within 30 days  from date of receipt of application by 
Reviewer shall be deemed to be disapproved.  
 
B. Submission of Plans to the Building Department 
 
Following the approval of Step 1, the owner may submit their plans to the Building Department or the required 
agencies that have jurisdiction for the required permits that may be needed for the modification project. Changes 
required by the said agencies must be reapproved by the Reviewer. Approval by the Reviewer for installation of 
4  
a project does not negate the owner’s responsibility to comply with all terms and conditions of any municipal 
permit or existing codes required for the project. The owner is responsible for investigating and following municipal 
requirements and obtaining permits. 
 
C. Construction Commencement 
 
Upon completion of Step 2, a copy of the building permit must be submitted to the Reviewer prior to the owner 
beginning construction. Any modification to the original application for any reason must also be reapproved. 
 
The owner shall be held responsible for the acts of his employees, subcontractors and any other persons or parties 
involved in construction  or alteration of the home site. The responsibilities include but are not limited to the 
following: 
 
1. When contractors will be crossing over property not owned by the project owner, the owner shall obtain 
permission of the neighboring lot owner, the Association, or the Avalon Groves Community Development District 
“CDD” in instances where the neighboring property is commonly owned by the Association or the CDD. 
2. Ensuring that the construction site, community properties and roadways are kept clean and free of all debris 
and waste materials, and that stockpiles of unused materials are kept in a neat and orderly fashion. 
3. Prohibiting the consumption of alcoholic beverages, illegal drugs or other intoxicants that could hamper the 
safety or well-being of other personnel on the site. 
4. Upon completion of the project, owner is responsible for restoring any common property or neighboring 
property that may have been damaged during the construction of the project to its original state or better. 
5. Cleanup of the project site is to be completed within 7 days of completion of the project. If a longer period of 
time is needed to accomplish this, owner should contact the Community Manager for a variance. 
6. In instances where common property may be crossed, the Board of Directors may require that the contractor 
or installer, other than the record titleholder of the project lot, provide the Association with an insurance certificate 
listing the Association as a named insured prior to commencing work. The Board can establish minimum limits for 
required insurance that will include coverage for General Liability and Worker’s Compensation. 
 
D. Final Inspection 
 
The Reviewer shall have the right to enter upon and inspect any prope rty, after giving a minimum of 24  hours 
notice to the homeowner, before, during, or after the completion of work for which approval has been granted. 
Upon completion of the improvement the homeowner shall give notice to the Reviewer. Any damage to streets, 
curbs, drainage inlets, sidewalks, street signs, walls, c ommunity signage, landscaping, irrigation, etc., must be 
repaired or the damage will be repaired by the Association or CDD and such costs will be charged to the owner. 
All work must be completed within one (1) year of commencement unless otherwise specifie d in the notice of 
approval or unless the Reviewer grants an extension in writing prior to the expiration of the application deadline 
(which it shall not be obligated to do).  
 
If projects will require additional time, the owner should contact the Reviewer with the anticipated completion 
date. Application approvals are valid for a period of six (6) months and a new modification request application 
must be submitted after that time has elapsed if construction has not commenced. The Reviewer is not obligated 
to perform a final inspection and it is up to the owner to ensure that the completed project complies with the 
Reviewer approved plans. 
 
IV. Express Approval 
 
In order to provide a speedier process for certain types of modification requests, the Community Manager will 
have the authority to approve certain modifications as delegated by the Reviewer upon receipt of a completed 
Modification Application with the proper supporting documents and the request shall be deemed approved by the 
Reviewer. Some of the modifications that may be approved by the Community Manager in writing are: 
5  
 
➢ Re-paint house exteriors and trims in the identical color previously approved by the Reviewer or installed by 
the original builder. 
➢ Replace existing screening with identical screening materials previously approved by the Reviewer or installed 
by the original builder. 
➢ Replace existing exterior doors with identical exterior doors previously approved by the reviewer or installed 
by the original builder. 
➢ Replace existing mailbox or security lighting with identical mailbox or security lighting previously approved by 
the Reviewer. 
➢ Replace existing roof with identical roof material to that previously approved by the Reviewer or installed by 
the original builder. 
➢ Installation of annuals and other plant materials within the original plant beds installed by the builder. 
➢ Install satellite receivers per Guideline specifications 
 
All references in the paragraph to “identical” shall mean that such item shall be replaced with an item that is 
identical in all respects to the existing item (i.e., the identical style, texture, size, color, type, etc.) or to the 
examples shown in these Guidelines. 
 
V. Reconstruction 
 
In the event that a residential structure or any part thereof is destroyed by casualty or natural disaster, the owner 
must notify the Reviewer and remove all debris within sixty (60) days, complete repair or reconstruction of the 
damaged Improvements within one (1) year in a manner consistent with the original construction (allowing for 
necessitated changes or improvements due to changes in applicable building codes), or such other Plans as are 
approved by the Reviewer.  The Reviewer will make every effort to accommodate the owner in the application 
process in order to repair or rebuild in a timely manner. 
 
VI. Appeals Process 
 
In the event that the Reviewer disapproves any plans and specifications, the applicant may request a rehearing 
by the Reviewer for additional review of the disapproved plans and specifications. The meeting shall take place 
no later than 30 days after written request for such meeting is received by the Reviewer, unless applicant waives 
this time requirement in writing. The Reviewer shall make a final written decision no later than 10 business days 
after such meeting. In the event the Reviewer fails to provide such written decision within 10 business days, the 
plans and specifications shall be deemed disapproved. 
 
Upon final disapproval by the Reviewer, the applicant may appeal the decision of the Reviewer to the THA Board 
of Directors within 30 days of the Reviewer’s written review and disapproval. Review by the Board shall take place 
no later than 30 days after receipt of the applicant’s request for appeal. The Board shall make a final decision at 
such meeting. The Board will then provide a written decision to homeowner within 10 business days. The decision 
of the Reviewer or, if appealed, the Board shall be final and binding. If the Board fails to hold such a meeting 
within 30 days after receipt  of the request for such appeal , then the plans and specifications shall be deemed 
disapproved. 
 
VII. SITE IMPROVEMENT STANDARDS 
 
These Architectural Guidelines are supplemental guidelines for t he recorded Declaration for SRHA. Additional 
requirements may be contained in the recorded documents. Applicants are encouraged to review the Declaration 
in addition to these guidelines prior to submitting a modification request. 
 
A. Additions / Setbacks  
 
Additions must be compatible with the architectural style, colors, detailing, and materials of the original structure. 
6  
The height of any addition shall not be higher than the original ridgeline and the proposed eave -line must be at 
the same height of the exi sting eave-line. No alterations or improvements shall be made which provide a roof 
pitch that varies from the roof originally constructed. Additions shall be built within the building setback lines 
originally established for SRHA (See chart below.) Storm water from a new addition roof must be discharged no 
closer than five feet of any neighboring property. Down spouts installed as a part of the addition shall not 
materially increase the drainage of storm water onto adjacent property . No addition shall be pe rmitted if it is 
determined to have a material adverse impact upon neighboring properties and/or the community. All additions 
shall meet the minimum wind load requirements of the applicable building codes (latest edition) concerning wind 
resistance and other applicable requirements. An engineer’s statement of wind load capacity is required. 
 
Building Setbacks  
Front Yard 20 feet to front facing garage 
 15 feet to front of structure 
Side Yard 5 feet 
Rear Yard       15 feet (5 feet to pool deck or screen patio) 
 
B. Air Conditioners  
 
No air conditioners shall be mounted through a window, door, hung on a wall or mounted on a roof. Replacements 
of air conditioner components shall be installed in the original component’s location unless approved by the 
Reviewer. All exterior air condensers/equipment shall be landscaped with hedges and not visible to a street or 
adjoining home.  
 
C. Antennae & Satellites   
 
No outside television, radio, or other electronic towers, aerials, antennae, satellite dishes, or device of any type 
for the reception or transmission of radio or television broadcasts or other means of communication shall hereafter 
be erected, constructed , placed, or permitted to remain on any portion of SRHA or upon any Improvements 
thereon, unless expressly approved in writing by the Reviewer; provided, however, that this restriction and 
approval requirement shall not apply to those antennae and satellite dishes that are one (1) meter (39.37 inches) 
in diameter or less and specifically protected by 47 C.F.R. Part 1, Subpart S, §1.4000, as may be amended from 
time to time, and/or other Applicable Law.  
 
 
D. Barbecues/Smokers/Grills/Fire pits  
 
Barbecue grills and smokers may be located or permitted upon the back patio or yard of a home. They must 
remain covered when not in use. 
 
Built-in barbecue units shall be located within the rear lanai area or outdoor living area a minimum of 5’ from any 
property line, and designed as an integral part of the home. Their location must be carefully planned to minimize 
smoke or odors affecting neighboring properties. 
 
Outdoor wood burning and fire pits of any type are prohibited. 
 
 
E. Canopies  
 
Installation of a canopy (fabric gazebo) that is to remain in place for more than seventy -two (72) hours requires 
approval of the Reviewer. The Modification Request must include a picture of the canopy/gazebo that is being 
requested and also a description detailing dimensions, color and location of installation drawn on lot site plan. 
Approvals will be considered based upon the following criteria: 
 
7  
➢ Canopies are not allowed in the short-term rental areas, only in Solterra Springs.  
➢ Canopies or fabric gazebos may be installed on the patio or in the rear yard of a home. 
➢ Canopies must be bolted into the concrete of the patio or anchored in concrete if located in a grassy area 
meeting wind codes 
➢ All safety installation instructions of the product must be followed. 
➢ Dimensions may not exceed 10’ X 10’ X 10’ (at peak height). 
➢ Canopy must be a solid neutral color. No bright colors or obvious stripes and patterns will be approved. The 
canopy color must compliment the colors and/or construction of the exterior of the home. 
➢ The canopy/gazebo must be maintained. If notified by the Community Manager that maintenance is needed 
(i.e. mildewed, stained, etc.), the owner must comply in no less than fourteen days of receipt of the notice. If 
torn or aged, the canopy/gazebo mus t be removed. A new application will be required to install  a replacement 
canopy/gazebo. No other type of tent or canopy cover will be approved. Umbrellas larger than a pool umbrella 
must have approval of the Reviewer. 
 
F. Clotheslines 
 
Visible outside clotheslines or other outside facilities for drying or airing clothes are specifically prohibited and 
shall not be erected, placed, operated, or maintained unless completely screened from view from any Common 
Areas, streets, other lots, and/or other units. 
 
G. Patios  
 
All patio extensions shall be concrete, concrete pavers, stone pavers in colors that complement the color scheme 
of the residence. The size of the patio shall be determined by the available space per lot and meet all required 
setbacks and impervious r equirements of Polk County. Construction of patios that conflict with the drainage 
pattern for the lot will not be allowed.  
 
H. Dog Houses/Kennels/Dog Runs/Invisible Fences  
 
Dog houses, kennels, dog runs and invisible fences are not permitted. 
 
I. Drainage Swales  
 
No drainage easement, swale, pond, or any related drainage, stormwater management, or Surface Water 
Management System structures, facilities, or infrastructure may be obstructed, filled in, or altered without the 
written approval of the Association and all applicable Governmental Authorities. If any Owner and/or Permittee 
obstructs, fills in, or alters any drainage easement, swale, pond, or any related drainage, stormwater 
management or Surface Water Management System structures, facilities, or infrastructure, then the Association 
shall have the right to enter onto such Lot(s) and/or Tract(s) and repair, replace, and restore such drainage 
easement, swale, pond, or any related drainage, stormwater management, or surface Water Management 
System structures, facilities, or infrastructure as necessary, all without liability or responsibility, criminal or civil, 
for trespass or any other action. Additionally, the Owner of such lot(s) and/or Tract(s) shall be responsible for 
any and all costs and expenses (including but not limited to, attorney’s fees and costs) incurred by the 
Association in the repair, replacement, and restoration of such drainage easement, swale, pond, or any related 
drainage, stormwater management, or Surface Water Management System structures, facilities, or 
infrastructure, which costs and expenses shall become and be levied and recouped by the Association as a 
Specific Assessment.  
 
J. Driveway and Sidewalk Extensions  
 
Additional concrete walking area(s) adjacent to the driveway, which extends the overall total driveway width, may 
Additional concrete or paver walking area(s) adjacent to the driveway, which extends the overall total driveway 
8  
width to no wider than the outside corners of the garage , may be approved. The parking area of the driveway 
may only be widened by one additional car width (approximately 10 feet) from the inside corner of the garage 
towards the interior of the yard. In no cases shall the driveway be wider than three cars wide. No additional 
walking area may be added to expanded driveways. Painting or staining of concrete paved surfaces is prohibited. 
Concrete surfaces may be sealed in a clear matte finish and a request must be submitted to the Reviewer. Parking 
is limited to the garage and driveway of the home. Other parking rules may be adopted by the Board. 
 
Additional sidewalks in any location require approval of the Reviewer and must be four (4) feet or less in width, 
a minimum of 18 inches from the property line. The area between the home and sidewalk should have landscaping 
or groundcover installed. Sidewalk addition must not obstruct drainage or cause ponding of water between the 
sidewalk and foundation of the home. 
 
Driveways shall be constructed of pavers or concrete with broom finish that shall be the width of the garage door 
(s) and extend to the roadway curb.  Sidewalks shall be constructed of concrete with broom finish throughout 
Solterra. 
 
K. Elevation of Lots 
 
No lot elevation changes shall be permitted which materially affect the surface grade of surrounding lots or 
common property. 
 
L. Encroachment and Plantings on Common Grounds 
 
No extension of the landscaping of a home site will be permitted on Association or CDD common grounds (property 
owned by either the HOA or CDD and shared by all members of the community), including pond banks. Residents 
shall not put trees, bushes, plantings, bird baths or feeders, lawn ornaments, planters, flower pots, picnic tables, 
furniture, fences, walks, hedge enclosures and other types of groupings on common grounds.  However, owners 
shall install and maintain sod and irrigation in pond banks and buffers adjoining lots.  
 
M. Exterior Painting 
 
All exterior paint colors must be painted as reasonably necessary to achieve and maintain a first class appearance, 
but in any event within forty-five days of receipt of a written notice from the Reviewer. No exterior colors will be 
permitted that will be inharmonious or discordant with other Improvements in Solterra, or incongruent with the 
architectural style of the Improvement itself. No overly bright or highly contrasting colors will be permitted. As 
much as possible, colors should work with the natural characteristics of Solterra. Primary colors are not permitted 
for exterior walls. Reds, yellows, and greens should be muted. No Owner may change the exterior color of a 
building or other structure on the Lot without the written approval of the Reviewer. 
 
N. Fences, Hedges and Walls.   
 
Except as approved by the ARB, no fences of any kind shall be permitted, except for temporary fences installed 
by the Declarant or a licensed homebuilder in any part of Solterra except for Solterra Springs. Under no 
circumstances shall wood, chain-link, be permitted on any Lot and/or Tract. Within Solterra Springs, fences may 
be constructed of beige/tan PVC or with bronze aluminum required on lots abutting any lake or preserve and 
must be installed per the following criteria: 
 
➢ Privacy fence shall be 6’ tall PVC beige/tan in a tongue & groove design with boards 6” wide with flat tops.  
This type of fence is only allowed on back to back lots or lots which back up to a wall. A solid hedge line of 
viburnums may also be installed as a privacy fence. 
➢ Any fences on lots on lakes or preserves shall only be bronze aluminum 5-foot tall 3 rail fence Jerith/ Style 
#202. A puppy style fence with additional pickets along the bottom portion of the fence is allowed. Commented [RC1]: What about "green" fences? 
9  
➢ All fences shall be at a height of six feet if your home backs up to another home. 
➢ Fences shall not be installed flush to the ground so that drainage could be blocked in any way. 
➢ Irrigation systems must be reconfigured to provide complete coverage outside and inside of the fenced area. 
➢ Fences must be kept clean and in good repair. 
➢ No posts or stringers may be visible from the outside of the fence. 
➢ All fences that will abut an existing fence must be installed with the final end side section graduating in 
height to meet the height of the existing fence or below the top of a perimeter wall. 
➢ No fence shall be constructed closer to the street, which the house faces, than ten (10) feet back from the 
forward facing corners of the house not including any open front porch. No fence shall be permitted to extend 
beyond the front corners of the house in any circumstance. 
➢ Fences for corner lots require close coordination with the ARB due to their unique layout and concerns for 
vehicle visibility/safety and compliance with existing easements and county building code setback requirements. 
Fences on Corner lots or lots that back up to a road may not extend closer than eleven (11) feet back from the 
side or rear property line and must have a solid hedge planted to buffer fence from side or rear street. 
➢ Except where easements or swales exist, fences will be installed no more than six (6) inches inside the 
property line. Alleyways between fences will not be permitted. 
➢ Any and all required governmental approvals/permits for fence construction are the responsibility of the 
homeowners and must be obtained prior to construction. It is the responsibility of the owner to comply 
with all County and/or Association requirements, whichever is most stringent. 
➢ It is recommended that fences not be installed in drainage easements. However, if the ARB grants 
permission for a fence to be installed in a drainage easement it is the responsibility of the homeowner to correct 
any changes in drainage on the homeowner’s home site or adjoining home sites at the homeowners expense. 
Should the Association, CDD or County be required to use drainage easement for access to a pond or lake, or 
correct a drainage situation either above or underground, the homeowner is responsible for all costs associated 
with the removal and replacement of the fence installed in said easement. 
➢ Fences may not be installed past any wetland conservation setback lines on any home sites within the 
community. 
➢ Any damage that may arise to another owner’s property during the installation process is the responsibility of 
the owner who is contracting for the fence installation. 
➢ Fences may finish below a perimeter wall, but in no case may finish above a perimeter wall.  
 
SOLTERRA SPRINGS APPROVED FENCE STYLES - See Sample Sheet Attached 
 
O. Firewood  
 
Firewood must be maintained in good order and must be located within the sidelines or in the back yard of a 
home vista and not visible to adjoining streets or lots. Covering firewood is allowed only if the cover is natural in 
color or consistent with the exterior colors of the home. Firewood stacks may not exceed 3 ’ high x 6’ wide x 2’ 
long. 
 
P. Flags 
 
In accordance with Florida Statutes 720.304, any homeowner may display one portable, removable United States 
flag or official flag of the State of Florida in a respectful manner, and on Armed Forces Day, Memorial Day, Flag 
Day, Independence Day, and Veterans Day may display in a respectful manner, portable removable official flags 
not larger than 4 ½ feet by 6 feet, which represent the United States Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, or 
Coast Guard. 
 
Other than outlined above, one flag per home will be allowed. The flagpole may be mounted to the home directly 
to the left or right of the front door or garage centered in the middle of the garage above the garage doors. 
Flagpoles attached to the home may not exceed 5 feet. Ground -mounted flagpoles will not be permitted. Flags 
must be flown on the pole in an outward fashion from the home. The American flag, Florida state flag, Military 
10  
Service or MIA flag Flags which are no larger than 4 ½’ X 6’, attached to the home in the above locations shall 
be permitted without Reviewer approval. 
 
The U. S. flag shall be flown in accordance with the requirements of the United States Flag Code. In no instance 
shall the flag be flown in violation of Section 720.304, Florida Statutes. 
 
No other flag of any sort may be displayed along with the United States flag or in lieu thereof except for Military, 
POW and MIA flags. They shall be no larger than the American flag nor shall they be flown above the American 
flag. Flags shall be replaced if faded, tattered, or in poor condition. Proper flag etiquette must be 
employed at all times. 
 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, one decorative flag, no larger than 24” X 36”, attached to the home in the above 
locations and displayed for the purpose of a holiday, shall be permitted without Reviewer approval. 
 
Q. Front Entryway/Storm Doors  
 
Screen enclosures, storm doors or screen doors are not allowed for front entrances. Wicker, wood or wrought 
iron tables and chairs may be used in the front porch/entryway. Plastic stackable furniture is not permitted. 
 
R. Front Roof Changes 
 
No changes will be permitted on any roof, which is visible from the front of the home  unless prior approval is 
received by the Reviewer . An extension for the purpose of creating a shelter for  a boat, recreational vehicle, 
automobile or other items is strictly forbidden. Solar tubes may be installed on front roofs but not sky lights. 
Skylights may be added to side and rear roofs upon approval of Reviewer. 
 
S. Garage 
 
No screening is allowed temporarily or permanently on garage door openings. Garage doors shall remain closed 
when the garage is not in use. Replacement of garage doors shall meet current County codes at the time of 
replacement. If there is more than one (1) garage door, all must be replaced at the same time. The new doors 
must match or coordinate with the color of the garage door trim or stucco. 
 
T. Garbage /Screening of Containers /HVAC & Other Equipment  
 
Each Owner of a Lot and/or Unit shall provide visually screened areas to serve as service yards in which garbage 
receptacles, electric meters, pool equipment, air -conditioning equipment and other outdoor equipment shall be 
located. Materials supplies, and equipment which are stored outside by Owner must be placed or stored in order 
to conceal them from view from Common Areas, streets, other Lots and/or other Units. Any such visual barrier 
shall consist of the approved type of fencing from Item N above along with landscaping, or plantings and shall be 
at a height and type which is approved by the Reviewer. Within the Short Term Rental and Townhome Service 
areas of the community, the garbage containers shall be located in the entryway by the front door or at the front 
corner of the garage (not in front of the garage door). 
 
Screening of garbage cans and ground -mounted equipment (i.e. HVAC, pool equipment, water softeners) shall 
be of material and color compatible with the design of the residence. All screens, l andscape structures or plant 
materials shall be located a minimum of two (2) feet from the ground mounted equipment to allow for adequate 
air circulation around the equipment, but may not encroach or trespass on a neighboring property. 
 
Appropriate enclosures for ground mounted equipment; garbage cans,  etc. shall be landscaping or approved 
fence style with landscaping. Overall height of the enclosure, including posts shall not exceed five (5) feet. Overall 
length shall be kept to the minimum necessary to accomplish the screening. 
11  
 
If landscaping is used for screening, “adequate screening” shall be plantings which initially (i.e. when first planted 
or installed) screens a minimum of eighty percent (80%) and which completely screens the cans or equipment 
within one (1) year from the date of approval. 
 
Within Solterra Springs, garbage cans shall not be placed outside for pick up earlier than 6 pm the night before 
and empty containers shall be removed from sight the same day as pick up. Within the Short Term Rental and 
Townhome Service areas, trash must be placed within the trash receptacle by 6am for daily pickup. All food refuse 
shall be placed in a covered receptacle to avoid attack from animals. Trash may not be accumulated or stored on 
the exterior of the home and open burning of garbage and other refuse is not permitted.  
 
Trash of any type may not be placed in the onsite compactors by owners, guests, or residents. Unauthorized use 
of the compactors or leaving trash on the ground at the compactors or anywhere other than the trash bins is not 
allowed and will result in a violation fee of at least $100 up to the maximum allowed by the community 
Declarations. Trash dumped on the ground at a compactor site will result in a violation fee of up to $1,000. 
 
U. Garden Hoses  
 
Garden hoses shall be on a hose wrap attached to the house or on a mobile station. Hoses may be neatly coiled 
on the ground in a flowerbed behind shrubbery out of sight from the street, common grounds or nearby neighbors. 
Circular (spiral coiled) hoses shall be secured. All hoses should be screened in a manner similar to screening of 
garbage containers. Reviewer approval is required prior to installing screening. 
 
V. Gas Tanks (Propane and/or Natural)  
 
Solterra is serviced with natural gas.  Any modifications to the existing lines require ARB approval. Owners may 
install a propane tank in the rear yard only provided all services lines and any tanks (except for meter) shall be 
installed underground. Small above ground tanks are only allowed mounted on gas grillf. 
 
W. Gutters  
 
All gutters must match the color of the fascia or exterior body of the home. Gutter down spouts should match the 
gutters and must not concentrate water flow onto neighboring properties. 
 
X. Holiday Decorations  
 
Holiday displays in the front entryway and on the front door, along with traditional holiday lighting do not require 
approval from the Reviewer. Holiday lights and decorations shall not create a nuisance to the adjacent residents 
or the community. One decorative flag, no larger than 24” X 36”, attached to the home in locations specified in 
Section P (Flags) and displayed for the purpose of a holiday, shall also be permitted without Reviewer approval. 
 
Holiday lights to celebrate Christmas, or similar holiday, may be installed commencing on Thanksgiving and shall 
be removed not later than January 1 0th of the following year. Holders for holiday lights that are installed on a 
home must be removed at the time that the lights are removed. 
 
Holiday displays (i.e. Halloween, Easter) other than those defined above may be installed no earlier than two (2) 
weeks prior to the holiday and must be removed within seven (7) days after the holiday. 
 
Y. House Numbers  
 
To aid emergency personnel, delivery people and to conform t o County ordinances, each house shall have a 
readily visible number permanently attached to the front of the home. The numbers shall be located in a location 
12  
clearly visible from the street. The approved style is 6” high black numbers.  
 
Z. Lake Slope Maintenance and Erosion Standards  
 
The owner will be responsible for repairs and maintenance of the lake slopes and banks to the  water’s edge for 
any lake or slope that is part of a lot or adjacent to a property line. This includes regular  irrigating and mowing 
of sod. Owners must ensure that the easement located around the lake banks remains free of any structures or 
landscaping in order for the area to be accessed for maintenance. Owners must further ensure that conditions on 
property will not cause erosion to occur on the lake banks. (i.e. installing drains from gutters or pool backwash). 
Naturally occurring erosion must also be repaired and maintained by owner; include resod, rock installation, etc. 
Native wetland plantings shall be maintained and not removed by homeowner. 
 
  AA. Landscaping/Borders/Arbors/Trellis/Water Features  
 
Individual plantings of annuals and other plantings which are seasonal in nature, are planted in existing beds and 
that do not exceed thirty-six inches (36”) in height shall be permitted without approval of the Reviewer; however, 
plans for all other modifications to any existing landscaping beds or additional landscape beds must be submitted 
to and approved by the Reviewer. All landscaping must be installed to fit in with neighboring properties. The 
Reviewer may reject the landscape plan based upon its review of the overall design and impact. 
 
The landscaping plan must detail the location of beds and planting materials. No invasive or non -native (e.g., 
melaleuca, Brazilian pepper) plants are permitted.  With the exception of dead trees or plants, no landscapi ng 
shall be removed without the prior written approval of the Reviewer. All varieties of citrus  or fruit trees  are 
permissible within the confines of a fenced rear yard. Fruit that drops from the tree may not be allowed to become 
a nuisance to neighbors or extend into a neighboring yard or common area. All ground surfaces on all portions of 
the lot outside of the planting beds shall be covered with St. Augustine turf and fully irrigated as part of the 
pressurized, smart irrigation water system serving each lot within Solterra. Please keep in mind that changes in 
landscaping can alter drainage plans for a lot and have a negative impact on neighboring property. When 
submitting a request for any landscaping projects, a photograph of the home and a site plan depicting the a rea 
where the project is to be installed must accompany the request. 
 
Decorative borders around landscaping beds require the prior approval of the Reviewer. Approved styles of 
landscape borders are shown below. 
 
 
Trellises/Arbors require the approval of the Reviewer. No more than three (3) trellises will be permitted and only 
one (1) trellis is allowed to be placed on the front façade of the house. Trellises may be constructed of PVC 
composite material and be kept in good repair. Trellis designed to be 80% covered within two (2) years in plant 
material Examples of approved styles are shown below. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Commented [RC2]: Is fruit allowed? 
13  
 
Approved Trellis / Arbor Styles 
 
Approved Arch Styles 
 

14  
Arbors may be constructed of wood or composite material with a maximum size of 400 square feet. Minimum 6” 
X 6” post shall be used and shall be properly anchored to meet all wind codes. The style of arbor should include 
decorative beams and ties. Arbors shall only be installed in the rear yard.  
 
Water features to include ponds and fountains must have the written approval of the Reviewer. A site plan 
showing the location of the pond must be submitted with the application. Fountains and water features shall be 
limited in height to four feet (4’) above the natural grade of the lot. Any fountain shall be of natural material, 
color and design, each of which is compatible with the overall architectural theme of the community. Design of 
these features should discourage creation of stagnant pools of water. A picture or conceptual drawing is required 
to be submitted with the request. 
 
BB. Lawn Furnishings/Decorative Accessories/Statutes/Feeders  
 
Lawn furniture shall be located in the rear of the home and not visible from the street in front or side of the home. 
Swings and patio style furniture will not be approved for placement in the front yard. Decorative accessories 
include items such as bird baths, bird feeders, bird houses, decorative flags (including holiday, s ports, etc.), 
fountains, patriotic display items (yellow ribbons, decals, etc.), personal items other than furniture, plants on 
hooks, plaques, potted plants, statues, sun dials, and tiki torches. Decorative accessories that are visible from the 
street or a common area shall not exceed thirty-six (36) inches in any dimension. The color must blend with the 
color and architectural features of the home. 
 
No ornaments or decorative accessories shall be hung from trees except for birdhouses or bird feeders. Decorative 
accessories shall not be placed down driveway perimeters, on street catch basins or on utility boxes. 
 
Flowerpots or decorative pots may be placed in the front yard and/or entryway but cannot exceed six (6) in 
number. Pots must be maintained in good condition at all times and must be continually planted with live foliage. 
Legal herbs or other veget ation may be planted in pots and placed in the rear patio of the home, but may not 
exceed thirty-six (36) inches in height. Partially buried pots will be allowed in the front yard. Pots located in the 
front yards of the home must be made of clay, masonry or other traditional garden material . Plastic containers 
are not permitted in the front yard of the home. Artificial plants may not be placed in landscape beds but may be 
located on a front porch/entryway or lanai. Artificial plants must be removed when faded or damaged. The 
Reviewer reserves the right to limit or restrict the use of artificial plants placed on a front porch/entryway. 
 
In Solterra Springs a garden box may be placed in the rear of the house with approva l. The box must be wood 
or plastic and may not exceed twelve (12) inches wide and thirty-six (36) inches long. 
 
Statues, decorative accessories and other types of lawn ornaments are permitted . The combined number of 
statues and decorative accessories will be limited to three. The stat ues will not be greater than four feet (4’) in 
height above the natural grade of the lot, must be placed in landscape beds and must blend in color with the 
home. Statues should be made of clay, masonry or metal . Plastic will not be permitted. The Reviewer reserves 
the right to require screening of statutes and decorative accessories whether they are located in the front yard 
or rear yard of homes. If plantings are used for screening, they should be large enough and in a quantity that 
will screen a minimum o f 50% of the statute or decorative accessory at the time of installation and will 
substantially screen the statute or decorative accessory within one year from the date of installation. A picture or 
drawing of the statue or decorative accessory must accompany the request. 
 
Birdhouses, bird feeders and birdbaths will be permitted in the back yard only and limited to no more than three 
(3) in total. Birdhouses may not exceed the roof eave in height and may not be attached to the house. House 
and support structure must be kept in good repair. Birdbaths may not exceed four feet in height above the natural 
grade of the lot. A picture or drawing of the birdbath must accompany the request. 
 
For safety reasons, each unit Owner who intends to be absent from his/her/its Unit during the hurricane season 
15  
(May 1st through November 30th of each year) shall prepare his/her/its Unit prior to departure by: removing all 
furniture, potted plants, and other movable objects from the yard and patio; and designating a responsible person, 
satisfactory to the Association, to care for the Unit should it suffer hurricane damage. Unless otherwise approved 
by the Reviewer, temporary or permanent exterior shutters may only be closed during a Storm Event. A “Storm 
Event” is defined as when a hurricane or tropical storm watch has been issued for the County by the appropriate 
Governmental Authority. 
 
CC. Lighting  
 
Except for seasonal holiday decorative lights, no exterior light fixtures shall be installed without adequate and 
proper shielding of fixtures and without ARB approval.  
 
DD. Lightning Rods and Brushes  
 
Lightning rods and brushes may be installed and shall be done in a manner that is least obtrusive  and uses the 
minimum number to accomplish the desired purpose. Lightning rods shall not be allowed to fall into disrepair. 
 
EE. Mailbox  
 
No mailboxes of any kind shall be permitted on any lot within the Short Term Rental and Townhome Service  
areas. It shall be the responsibility of an Owner or tenant to arrange for off-site access to mail facilities, such as 
post office boxes. There will be a community mailbox installed at the designated common area for residents in 
the Solterra Springs Community. 
  
FF. Outbuildings 
 
No temporary or permanent utility or storage shed, storage building, ten ts, trailers, shacks, or other temporary 
accessory buildings or structures shall be erected or permitted to remain on any Lot. 
 
GG. Patios and Screen Enclosures  
 
Patios and Screen Enclosures must be located on the areas shown as “Patio” or “Lanai” on the house plans. If a 
screened patio extension is requested on the rear of the home, a set of plans must be submitted with the 
Modification Request, as well as a site plan showing where the proposed extension will be placed. Additionally: 
 
➢ Framing may be only bronze anodized or electro statically painted aluminum. 
➢ Screening shall be charcoal and of standard mesh size. No privacy screening is permitted; except below chair 
rail. 
➢ No decorative railing, grilles or bars will be permitted on screens and doors. 
➢ No use of aluminum or vinyl windows to enclose a rear patio or porch or screen room is allowed. All enclosed 
spaces must be of similar construction to main home. 
➢ A 16-inch aluminum kick plate that matches the framework will be permitted on rear screen enclosures. 
➢ Knee walls shall not exceed 24 inches in height and shall be constructed of concrete block with stucco finish 
and painted to match the body of the house. 
➢ Acceptable roofs for patio extensions are as follows: 
➢ Constructed to match the existing roof with matching shingles 
➢ Composite or “Elite” panel roof or an equivalent aluminum roofing with shingles that match home 
➢ Screen “cage” of opaque Florida glass 
➢ Roofline may not exceed the height of the home. 
➢ Exterior of the enclosure must be landscaped if not located within a fenced area. 
➢ Irrigation systems may require modification to ensure 100% coverage of the property. This should be a part 
of the Modification Request. 
16  
➢ Patio enclosures may NOT be used as a storage area. 
➢ Screens must be maintained in good condition at all times. 
 
HH. Play Equipment and Accessory Structures  
 
All exterior recreation and play equipment, swing sets, jungle gyms, soccer goals, tennis courts, volleyball courts, 
batting cages, bicycle racks or stands, tree houses, sandboxes, trampolines, etc. require the prior written approval 
of the Reviewer. Such structures are only allowed within the Solterra Springs area. All such equipment must be 
located within the rear yard of the property and must be screened from public view (i.e. with fence and/or mature 
landscaping) and must be located at least five feet from any property line. All play equipment must be maintained 
on a regular basis by the owner to preserve community standards. Tree houses are not permitted. Skateboard 
ramps may be used in the fenced rear yard of a home but cannot be used on a driveway, pedestrian walkway, 
street or common area of the community such as basketball court or parking lots.  
 
Specifications for recreational and play equipment are as follows: 
 
➢ The overall height of play structures may not exceed twelve (12) feet in height. However, the height may be 
reduced by the  Design Review Committee based on the lot size and impact on neighboring lots. This will be 
determined by a site visit. 
➢ Play structures must be crafted in wood or recycled plastic. Aluminum or metal tubing is prohibited. A picture 
and dimensions of the play structure must be submitted with the architectural application prior to approval. 
➢ Applications for play structures must include a site plan clearly showing its intended placement. The structure’s 
visual impact to neighboring lots and/or the street must be buffered as much as possible with approved fencing 
and/or landscaping. 
➢ Play structures must be securely anchored to withstand high winds that may accompany a tropical storm or 
hurricane. Any detachable parts must be removed and stored in a safe location when a tropical storm or hurricane 
warning is in effect. 
➢ Fence applications must be submitted in advance of installation of the fence and only current approved styles 
are permitted. 
➢ If the play structure will be buffered by landscape the plant material must start at a height of forty-eight (48) 
inches from the ground and may not exceed seventy-two (72) inches of overall height at maturity. The landscape 
buffer must be maintained at a height of 72 inches at all times. The landscape buffer installation may not alter 
the drainage of the lot. The proposed plant material and location of landscape buffer must be submitted to the 
committee via application prior to installation. 
 
Basketball equipment: Permanent basketball goals will not be allowed. One regulation-size or smaller, professional 
mobile backboard may be placed in the driveway of the home. Equipment may be used on the driveway but not 
on sidewalks or on streets. Equipment must be maintained on a regular basis by the homeowner to preserve 
community standards. Damaged or rusted equipment must be replaced or disposed of.  Equipment must be 
removed at night and stored inside the enclosed garage of a Unit. 
 
Trampolines must be located within a rear yard that has a six-foot privacy fence only and should be placed a 
minimum of twelve feet (12’) away from neighboring property lines. 
 
Please note that all recreational equipment requires approval of the Reviewer. An Architectural Modification  
Request Form must be submitted to the Reviewer along with a site plan showing the area where the equipment 
will be located. All recreational equipment to include (but not be limited to), large toys, and other miscellaneous 
personal items should be stored out of public view when not in use. Basketball equipment and trampolines may 
not be used between dusk to dawn. 
 
II. Signs  
 
17  
No sign of any kind (including but not limited to and without limitation, for lease, circulars, billboards, and/or 
posters) shall be displayed on any Lot, except as permitted by the Declaration and/or required to be permitted 
by Applicable Law. 
  
➢ When needed for permit purposes, contractors may place a sign box on the property during construction of 
the approved modification but no advertisement sign may be installed. 
➢ One security/alarm sign not to exceed one (1) square foot in size may be installed within ten (1 0) feet of a 
front entrance. 
➢ “No Soliciting” notifications shall be limited to placards or stickers not to exceed six by eight inches (6” x 8”) 
in size may be placed to the side of the front door frame or in a window 
near the front door or within the landscaped bed nearest to the front door of the home. 
➢ Two signs advertising a political candidate or party may be posted in the front yard of a home five days prior 
to an election day and must be removed on the day following the election. Signs may not be larger than twenty-
four inches (24”) in height or width. 
 
JJ. Skylights and Solar Collectors 
 
Skylights must be integrated as a part of the roof design and shall only be put on a side or rear facing roof. Color 
of framing should blend with the roof shingle color. 
 
Subject to Applicable Law, the following restrictions shall apply to the installation of solar collectors and other 
energy conservation equipment. No solar energy collector panels or attendant hardware or other energy 
conservation equipment shall be constructed or installed unless it is harmonious with the attached structure (i f 
affixed to a structure) or the surrounding Improvements (if not affixed to a structure), as determined and 
approved in writing by the Reviewer (which approval shall not be unreasonably withheld or denied). No solar 
panel, vents or other roof -mounted mechanical equipment affixed to a Unit’s roof shall project more than one 
foot (1’) above the surface of the roof. All such equipment, other than the actual solar panels, shall be consistent 
with the color scheme of the portion of the Unit to which such equipm ent is installed and/or the surrounding 
Improvements if not attached to a Unit. (Note: Roof mounted solar collectors and equipment may void that 
portion of the roof warranty where the panels are installed.) 
 
KK. Storm/Hurricane Shutters  
 
Permanently installed hurricane shutters may be accordion or roll-up style and must be approved by the Reviewer. 
Temporary shutters include Lexan panels or similar type material, aluminum panels and fabric panels. While not 
advised, if using plywood panels they should be marine grade and ¾” thick. Any permanent attachment brackets 
that are required to be installed on the home must be finished to match the color of that part of the home to 
which it is attached. 
 
Unless otherwise approved by the Reviewer, temporary or permanent exterior shutters may only be closed during 
a Storm Event. A “Storm Event” is defined as when a hurricane or tropical storm watch has been issued for the 
County by the appropriate Government Authority .  Said temporary or permanent exterior shutters must  be 
removed no later than three (3) days after the warning is lifted . In the event of an actual storm event causing 
substantial damage to the home, panels may remain in place for a period not to exceed six (6) days. 
 
LL. Swimming Pools/Spas/ Jacuzzis 
 
Any swimming pool to be constructed upon any home site shall be subject to review by the Reviewer. The setback 
should be 5' on side and 5’ minimum as required by County on back; as the design must incorporate at a minimum, 
the following: 
 
➢ The composition of the material must be thoroughly tested and accepted by the industry for such construction. 
18  
➢ No lighting of a pool or other recreation area shall be installed without the approval of the Reviewer, and if 
allowed shall be designed for recreation character so as to buffer the surrounding homes from the lighting. 
➢ All applications for the installation of a swimming pool must be accompanied with a certified lot survey 
showing the proposed pool. The pool must comply with all applicable setback requirements. Once obtained, a 
copy of the building permit must be submitted to the Reviewer. 
➢ Pool filter equipment must be placed out of view of neighboring properties and the noise level to neighboring 
properties must be considered in locating equipment. Pool equipment sha ll be screened with shrubs or fencing. 
All screening must have the prior written approval of the Reviewer. 
➢ Pool heating equipment must comply with all applicable building, zoning and fire codes. Please refer to Section 
JJ for roof mounted solar panel guidelines. 
➢ When screening the pool filter and heating equipment with landscaping, plants shall be a minimum of thirty-
six inches in height and provide seventy -five percent (75%) density at the time of installation. Plants shall be 
allowed to grow to the height of the pool equipment, then properly trimmed and maintained at that height. Any 
dead plants shall be replaced immediately with a plant of the same type and similar height. 
➢ Only in-ground pools will be approved – above ground pools are prohibited. 
➢ Spas and Jacuzzis must have the prior written approval of the Reviewer and should be of the in-ground type 
with the exception of above ground types not exceeding three feet (3’) in height above the existing grade level. 
They shall be located in the rear ya rd with appropriate screening or enclosure to be  screened from street view 
and the view of any neighboring property.  All gas tanks for heaters shall be buried underground.  
➢ The pool is required to be either fenced or enclosed by a screen enclosure. Screen  enclosures require the 
prior approval of the Reviewer – see Section GG for screen enclosure installation standards. Plans of the proposed 
screen enclosure or fence must be included with the application and a written description showing design, color, 
height, etc. is also required. 
➢ Irrigation system must be re-installed to insure 100% coverage of sodded and landscaped property. 
➢ Disposal of chlorinated water may only be performed by either (i) discharging the chlorinated water into the 
sanitary sewer (wastewater) system through a direct connection or through a household drain such as a bathtub, 
sink, or floor drain), (ii) using a licensed sewage handling service to drain and dispose of the chlorinated water, 
or (iii) dechlorinating the water to less than 0.1 mg/L prior to discharging the water into any Lot, Tract, the 
Common Areas, streets, or into the waterways, canals, or Greenway Buffers.  
 
Under no circumstances may chlorinated water be discharged onto lawns, other lots, common properties, and 
streets or into storm drains or retention ponds. Damage, including erosion, to common areas due to backwashing 
will be repaired by the Association and all expenses incurred by the Association will be billed to the owner. 
 
MM. Water Softeners  
 
Water softeners shall be screened from view from the street with appropriate screening as described in Section T 
herein. Installation may require a permit from the local municipality. Please check with the County Building 
Department. Discharge from water softeners shall be routed to an open-air sanitary waste line or it may dump into 
a laundry tub or sewer line with a “P” trap. It shall not drain to the outside open areas. 
 
NN. Windows, Awnings and Shutters  
 
Owners may request to install energy conservatio n films on windows. No reflective tinting or mirror finishes (to 
include aluminum foil) will be permitted. Window tinting film applied to the interior of the windows shall be gray 
in color with no more than 21% solar reflectance and no less than 30% light transmittance. The degree of darkness 
allowed for non -reflective tinting shall remain with the Reviewer on a case -by-case basis. A brochure or 
manufacturer’s description must accompany all tinting requests. All requests must include a sample of the material 
to be used. This sample will remain with the application and will not be returned. 
 
Window treatments shall consist of drapery, blinds, decorative panels or other tasteful window covering. Any 
window treatments facing the front street of the home should be white, off-white or other light-toned neutral solid 
19  
color (i.e. interior shutters in a wood tone). N on-patterned neutral colored material or other temporary window 
covering (not to include newspaper) may be used for periods not exceeding one (1) week after an owner or tenant 
first moves into a home or when permanent window treatments are being cleaned or repaired. 
 
Awnings and shutters will be considered on a case -by-case basis. Awnings will be allowed only on the rear of a 
home and may not be roof mounted. Design, color and materials must be compatible with the home and 
neighboring properties. A sample of the color and material should accompany the request. Awnings with stripes, 
patterns, advertising or logos will not be allowed. Shutters must appear as an integral part of the building elevation 
and must be made of materials that complement the home and neighboring properties. Color must coordinate with 
that of the home.  
 
OO. Landscape:  
 
The purpose of the landscape review process is to ensure a harmonious neighborhood streetscape and to protect 
the aesthetic quality of the overall community. The landsca pe design standards are intended to provide for the 
needs and desires of the lot owner in a manner which also protects the lifestyle of adjoining neighbors. Landscape 
plans shall be submitted for approval by the SRHA. 
 
1. Landscaping of Easements  and Right of  Ways: Within the boundary of a Lot, landscape material in 
easements shall be limited to sod, low ground cover or small shrubbery, subject to the approval of the Reviewer. 
Trees are not permitted in easements or within the right of way (between curb and si dewalk) which will prevent 
maintenance of utilities or impede drainage. Owners of Lots shall be responsible, at the Lot Owner’s 
expense, for the prompt removal and subsequent replacement of any landscape improvements within 
easements as may be required for access, installation and maintenance of utilities or other purposes. 
 
2. Approved Landscape Palette: The shade trees, accent trees, palms, listed in the Solterra Landscape 
Palette (attached) are permitted, and native landscape materials are encouraged. Approval of landscape will be 
based on the selection of plant materials as well as the overall landscape design. 
 
3. Prohibited Landscape Materials: The following landscape materials are not permitted for use within the 
community: 
 
Common Names Botanical Names 
Arbor Vitae Thuja Orientalis 
Australian Pine Casuarina Spp  
Brazilian Pepper Schinus Spp.  
Chinaberry Meloa Acedarach  
Chinese Tallow Sapium Sebiferum 
Eucalyptus Species Eucalyotus Species  
French Mulberry Morus Alba 
Jaranda Jaranda Mimosifolia 
Mimosa Albiza Supp. 
Peltophorum Peltophorum Pierocarpum  
Punk Trees Melaleuca Spp. 
 
4. In order to maintain a framework of cohesiveness from which Applicants may express their landscape choices, 
the following landscape zones have been established: 
 
Streetscape Zone 
Front Yard Zone 
Side Yard Zone 
Rear Yard Zone 
Commented [RC3]: Fruit trees other than citrus? 
20  
 
e. Streetscape Zone: The Streetscape Zone stretches from the curb to the front property line, and runs the full 
width of the Lot. On Corner Lots, this zone also extends the full length of the street side yard to the rear property 
line. 
 
The entire Streetscape Zone shall be sodded as per turf specifications in this section. No other landscape material 
is permitted in Streetscape Zones unless approved by the Reviewer. 
 
f. Front Yard Zone. The Front Yard Zone runs the full width of the width of the Lot and is the area between the 
front plane of the Structure and the Streetscape Zone. The minimum landscape requirements within the Front Yard 
Zone shall include the following: 
 
• One (1) Live Oak tree 3” caliper 12’ high minimum  shall be planted in the Front Yard Zone plus one (1) yard 
tree per 2,000 square feet of total area within the Front Yard Zone or a minimum of one (1) yard tree, whichever 
is greater. The yard tree may be substituted by a cluster of two (2) approved palm trees or a large ornamental 
tree.  Live Oak trees shall be planted a minimum of 8’ away from sidewalks or utility easements. 
• The turf area to planting bed ratio shall be a minimum of 4:1 and a maximum of 3:1 in the Front Yard Zone. 
Essentially, this means that the landscape allocated to shrub and ground cover shall be no less than 25% and 
no more than 33% of the Front Yard Zone (excluding hardscape areas). 
 
g. Side Yard Zone: The Side Yard Zone is from the front to the back of the Structure on both sides over to the 
respective property lines. The minimum landscape requirements within the Side Yard Zone shall include the  
following: 
 
• Interior Lots: One (1) approved shrub per 3 linear feet along each side elevation for a minimum of 6’ back from 
the front corner of structure. 
 
• Corner Lots – Street Side Yard: For all widths of Corner Lots, a continuous foundation hedge is required with 
a minimum of one (1) approved shrub per 3 linear feet along the street side yard elevation of the building structure 
and any pool enclosure or fence. Only shrubs beyond those required for the foundation hedge may be clustered. 
In addition to the continuous foundation hedge, one (1) Live Oak tree min 3” caliper and 12’ height shall be planted 
per 2,000 square feet of total area within the Side Yard Zone or a minimum of two (2) Live Oak tree min 3” caliper 
and 12’ height shall be planted approximately 10’ back from side lot line and 50’ spacing in the  street side yards 
in accordance with approved plan by Polk 
 
•  County. 
 
h. Rear Yard Zone: The rear Yard zone runs the full width of the Lot and is the area between the rear plane of 
the Structure and the rear property line. Unless otherwise approved by the Reviewer, the minimum landscape 
requirements within the Rear Yard Zone shall include the following: One (1) approved shade tree shall be planted 
per 2,000 square feet of total area within the Rear Yard Zone or a minimum of one (1) shade tree, whichever is 
greater. The shade tree may be substituted by a cluster of three (3) approved palm trees or a cluster of three (3) 
pine trees or cypress trees if on pond or wetland area. 
 
5. General Landscape Requirements: 
 
a. Design Approach: The recommended landscape character of yard areas should emphasize either a casual 
or natural environment or a formal appearance for contemporary style architecture. 
 
b. Landscape Quality and Installation: Trees and shrubs shall be nursery grown in containers and free from 
disease, insect infestations, defects and injuries. Installations should allow adequate area to promote a healthy 
growth pattern and to accommodate the mature growth requirement of each plant species. Trees shall be correct 
21  
in form for their species and have a normal growth habit with well development and densely foliated branches. 
 
c. Street and Yard Tree Staking: All street trees and yard trees must be staked as shown on the tree staking 
exhibit in this section using a Tree Frog Environmental Products, Pro40E System as manufactured by Staking 
Systems Supply, Inc. or an equivalent system. 
 
d. Existing Trees: Unless otherwise prohibited in conservation areas, existing trees selected to remain on a Lot 
must be selectively pruned to remove dead wood and undesirable branches. Clusters of smaller trees and natural 
areas must be groomed and mulched for a neat appearance or planted with shrubs or ground cover. 
 
e. Tree Fences, Wells and Aerators: Protective tree fences, tree wells, and aerators shall be installed as required 
by the Reviewer to protect existing trees to be saved. 
 
f. Mulch: All shrubs shall be top-dressed with 3” of Grade “A” cypress or pine bark mulch after watering in. Stone, 
rock, gravel, crushed brick or similar materials are not allowed as a substitute for mulch for new construction or  
modifications. 
 
Ground covers shall be planted in such a manner to present a finished appearance within one (1) year of planting. 
Shrubs shall be planted such that the gap will be closed within the first year of growth. 
 
Shrubs and ground cover in Front Yard Zones shall be planted in clusters or within curvilinear planting beds or in 
formal rows. Shrubs of the same species shall be massed together, in general, and random mixing of different 
species is discouraged. Different shrub species should be tiered in height with the taller shrub species closet to the 
Structure and the lower species in front. Plant masses should be arranged to provide visual excitement by the use 
of color and texture and to soften stark building elements and corners as well as to enhance architectural features. 
Plantings may be required by the Reviewer to screen portions of driveways, service yard areas, blank walls, patio 
decks and swimming pools. 
The use of linear buffer hedges along property lines in Front Yard Zones is not permitted. Berms, trees and clusters 
of shrubs may be used to create a sense of separation and definition when appropriate between front yards. Linear 
buffer hedges in side and rear yards must be routinely trimmed not to exceed 72” in height. 
 
g. Landscape Rocks: The use of landscape rocks as a design element for new construction or modifications 
shall be limited to no more than three (3) accent boulder rocks areas in the landscape and no larger than a 3' X 3' 
area for each rock area. Any such materials must be used in moderation and m ust be shown on plans submitted 
for Design Review, Landscape Review, or Modifications Review (as applicable). 
 
h. Sod: All portions of road right-of-ways and the Lot shall be sodded, except for conservation area required to 
remain natural. To insure a consistent turf color and texture throughout the  community St. Augustine must be 
used. After initial installation, turf areas may not be removed or replaced with mulch, stone, rock, gravel, crushed 
brick or similar materials without written approval of the Reviewer. As part of initial construction, Builder shall re-
sod any lake banks abutting a Lot with St. Augustine sod from the Lot boundary to the mean normal water design 
elevation, if not weed free. 
 
i. Utility Equipment: All utility company boxes and transformers are set within road right-of-ways or easements. 
Grading around these items must ensure positive drainage. Upon maturity, the shrubs used to screen ut ility 
equipment shall be the type and size necessary to screen the full height of any such equipment. 
 
j. Service Yard Access: Air-conditioning compressors, pool pumps and related equipment in service yards areas 
must be screened by a service area wall or landscape material. 
 
k. Sight Distances at Intersections: No fence, wall, hedge, or shrub planting shall be placed, permitted or 
maintained where such improvements would create a traffic or sight problem at intersections for Corner Lots or at 
22  
the intersections of streets and driveways or pedestrian trails. No trees shall be permitted unless the foliage line is 
maintained at a sufficient height to prevent obstruction of sight lines for Corner Lots and intersections as set forth 
above. 
 
l. Artificial Vegetation and De corative Embellishments: No artificial vegetation shall be permitted  on the 
exterior of any portion of any Lot or Unit within Solterra except on front porch/entryway . Exterior sculptures or 
lawn ornaments must be approved by the Reviewer and include but are not limited to the following: deer, swans, 
flamingos, ducks, birdbaths, sculptures, windmills, or similar items. 
 
m. Wells: No wells of any kind shall be permitted . Such prohibition shall not limit the Developer or the SRHA 
from drawing upon lakes or installing and maintain wells within the Property. 
 
n. Irrigation Systems: The Developer has installed or will install, a reclaimed water irrigation line serving each 
Lot, Tract, and the Common Areas in Solterra, to be owned, maint ained and operated by Utilities Inc., the local 
water and sewer provider  (“Reclaim System”). At this time the Reclaim  System does not have irrigation water 
available to the community but is anticipated in the future.  In the meantime, potable water from the house supply 
shall be used for irrigation water.  If a Lot Owner initially connects to the potable water system and reclaimed 
water becomes available at a later date, the Lot Owner is obligated, at Lot Owner’s expense, to connect the Lot’s 
irrigation system to the reclaimed water system.  No other sprinkler or irrigation systems of any type which draw 
water from wells, lakes, rivers, ponds, canals or other surface waters within Solterra shall be installed, constructed, 
or operated within Solterra.  
 
Each Owner shall be responsible for installing and maintaining a fully automatic, full yard coverage irrigation 
system servicing their Lot. As part of initial construction, each Builder shall install in conformance with the 
RESIDENTIAL IRRIGATION PERFORMANC E SPECIFICATIONS (attached)  and Lot Owner shall subsequently 
maintain an underground irrigation system on a Lot in accordance with the following requirements: 
 
•Irrigation systems shall be of sufficient size and capacity to provide full coverage for the Lo t or as may be 
reasonably achieved. 
•Irrigation systems shall be designated to minimize over -spray to adjacent properties, sidewalks, streets and 
driveways. 
•Coverage shall include right -of ways and pond/lake areas adjoining Lots. Sprinkler heads shall be located 
between the outside edges of the sidewalk and curb. 
•Irrigation systems shall utilize an automatic control device and an automatic rain cut off switch. 
•Pop-up spray shall be utilized in shrub beds; bubblers for each tree location; and pop -up rotors in sod areas. 
Drip irrigation may be used in areas immediately adjacent to building walls in tight planters. PVC pipe is to be a 
class no less than 160 PVC. 
•Owners of Lots on any lake or other body of water shall maintain and irrigate, at such Owner’s e xpense, all 
landscaping between the Lot boundary and such water’s edge. As part of initial construction, Builders shall extend 
irrigation lines into the shoreline area with sufficient lines and heads to provide full coverage as may be reasonably 
achieved.   
Maintenance by Owner to repair any damaged sprinkler heads, valves, water lines, irrigation controller, or soil 
moisture sensors, shall commence within five (5) days of the notice of the occur rence of the irrigation service 
being inoperable or not fully functioning as a result of the failure or damage to the equipment located on, under, 
or within such Person’s property.  All repairs  required to be performed by owners shall be completed within 
fourteen (14) days of the loss of or reduction in irrigation se rvices, or when the repairs cannot reasonably be  
completed within such period the Person shall commence repairs within such period and continue ther eafter in 
an expeditious manner until completion.  Further, the Association may engage the maintenance services of any 
irrigation services provider to repair any damaged sprinkler heads, valves, water lines, irrigation controller, or soil 
moisture sensors  in the event the property owner do es not timely commence and complete a repair, the 
Association may levy a penalty or repair at the owner’s expense (in accordance with Applicable Law) for each day 
the irrigation system is inoperable or otherwise in disrepair. 
23  
 
6. Lot and Landscape Maintenance:  
 
a. Maintenance of Lots: Within the Short-term Rental and Townhome Service areas, the Association shall 
maintain all landscaping of the lots and  conservation areas where special preservation on provisions may apply . 
Within Solterra Springs, Lot owners will routinely mow lawns; edge beds; prune shrubs and groundcovers; control 
weeds, pests and diseases via spray application of appropriate products; remove and replace dead trees and 
plants; dispose of trash; apply water and repair irrigation systems; replace mulch; and other necessary 
maintenance measures, including fertilization, to sustain the landscape in a neat, orderly, vigorous and healthy 
condition. Grass areas on Lots with a finished Structure may not exceed 6” in height between lawn cuts. 
 
b. Maintenance of Roofs and Driveways: Roofs, exterior surfaces, pavement areas (including, but not limited 
to, driveways and private sidewalks), and other Improvements comprising the Unit, as well as the public sidewalks, 
driveways, and curbs immediately adjoining each Lot or Unit shall be pressure washed by the Owner  as often as 
necessary to maintain a clean and kept appearance. 
  
c. Maintenance of Right-of-Ways: Lot owners shall be responsible for maintaining and irrigating sod within the 
right-of-way between the pavement edges or back of curb and the Lot. Lot Owner is responsible for maintenance 
of sidewalks including keeping level and replacing if cracked. 
 
d. Shorelines Areas: Owners of Lots encompassing or bordering on any body of water or wetland shall keep the 
shoreline free of litter and debris and shall maintain and irrigate, at Lot Owner’s expense, sod and any landscaping 
between the Lot boundary and such water’s edge maybe covered elsewhere. Maintenance of landscaping shall be 
in accordance with requirements of the Association and requisite governmental authorities. 
 
 
 
 
 
EXHIBIT 
 
Approved Perimeter & Pool Fence Design 
 
 
 
 
 
Style #202 Fence Panel 
 
 
 
Style #202 Panel with Gate  
 
 
Style #202 Puppy Style Fence 
 

 
 
 
Approved Privacy Fencing: 6’ PVC beige color, tongue & groove, flat tops  

 
Solterra Landscape Palette  
 
 
 
SOLTERRA 
RESIDENTIAL IRRIGATION 
PERFORMANCE SPECIFICATIONS 
Edition December 2019 
I. GENERAL 
A. Work Included 
1. The Irrigation Contractor (IC) will be working under the authority of 
the Home Building Company. 
2. The IC shall provide all labor, materials, equipment, technical 
supervision, services, construction equipment to perform the work in 
connection with the irrigation system, as indicated within these 
performance specifications and detail drawings. 
B. Substitutions 
1. All equipment specified here in, listed on legend or as shown on 
detail drawings shall be incorporated within the residential irrigation   
installation. 
2. NO SUBSTITUTIONS WILL BE ALLOWED WITHOUT PRIOR 
WRITTEN APPROVAL BY THE DEVELOPER 
 
II. SYSTEM  OPERATION 
A. The irrigation system will be controlled by an automatic timer in 
accordance with local ordinances and requirements.   
 
 
III. LAYOUT 
A. Point Of Connection (POC) 
1. A one inch (1") reclaimed water service whip will be provided for 
each Residential Lot but connection shall be made to potable water 
line until reclaim water becomes available  
2. A control zone (single 1" automatic control valve) shall be 
limited to a maximum output of 20 GPM. 
3. The automatic control valves, master valve, filter and pressure 
reducer are to be installed by the IC within valve boxes adjacent to 
garage at the front of the property. 
4. Typically four (4) to six  (6) automatic control valves per  Residential 
Lot. Two (2) sprays zones one (1) rotor zone and one (1) drip zone 
plus a Master Valve (MV) at the Point of Connection (POC) 
5. The IC shall connect to the service whip installing: 
a) Master Valve 
b) 1 ½” Filter 
c) 1" Pressure Regulator 
d) Automatic Control Valve(s) 
Extend control wires from the Automatic Control Valves and MV to the Control Timer 
located on the Outside Wall of the Garage.  
 